---
date: "2023-08-15T11:50:54.000Z"
title: Otter ROS
tagline: A ROS 2 package for the Otter USV intended to aid researchers in the field of marine robotics.
preview: >-
  A ROS 2 package for the Otter USV intended to aid researchers in the field of marine robotics. Cover photo by Dr. Joshua Marshall.
image: >-
  https://i.imgur.com/ivFebMj.jpeg
---

# Project Overview

I've been deeply involved in several significant projects centered around the Maritime Robotics Otter Uncrewed Surface Vessel (USV) at Ingenuity Labs, each contributing to its capabilities and functionality.

In the first phase, I embarked on a series of boat upgrades and hardware integrations. This included attaching LiDAR to the Otter via a meticulously crafted 3D printed mount. I designed and fabricated four distinct 3D printed components to enhance the Otter's performance and adapt it for specific tasks. Additionally, I played a pivotal role in the wiring and concept development of a payload hardware box. This comprehensive unit incorporated an ethernet switch, power board, Jetson Orin, and radio components, optimizing the Otter's hardware for advanced functionalities.

Another significant milestone in this journey involved programming a Robot Operating System 2 (ROS2) driver package tailored to interface seamlessly with the Otter USV's proprietary hardware. This effort included the creation of five custom data types, streamlining control, and enabling data reception, including GPS, IMU, power metrics, and odometry data generated by a Kalman filter. This ROS2 integration elevated the Otter's capabilities and paved the way for advanced control and data analysis.

The most groundbreaking achievement was the development and publication of a pioneering particle-filter-based global localization algorithm, specifically designed for the Maritime Robotics Otter USV. This algorithm proved invaluable for accurate localization in GPS-denied environments, achieving up to 20 meters of global accuracy. Leveraging satellite imagery and LiDAR data, the algorithm employs a unique approach. It simulates LiDAR scans of the shoreline by raycasting on regional satellite imagery from random locations, comparing these simulated scans with real LiDAR point clouds to generate precise estimates of the Otter's position. This innovative algorithm adapts the scan matching step of a traditional particle filter to USV localization challenges, significantly enhancing the Otter's navigational capabilities.

These endeavors culminated in comprehensive in-water testing, conducted across four distinct locations in Kingston and Minden, Ontario. These tests underscored the practical impact of our work, validating the Otter's enhanced capabilities in various real-world scenarios. These projects collectively demonstrate my commitment to advancing autonomous marine technology and my capacity to deliver tangible results in complex, real-world environments.

## Tech Stack

### Hardware

- Maritime Robotics AS Otter USV
- Velodyne VLP 16 LiDAR
- Jetson Orin
- GPS/IMU

### Software

- Robot Operating System 2 (ROS2) + Gazebo and RViz
- Python
- C++
- OpenCV

---

## Links

Read [OtterROS: Picking and Programming an Uncrewed Surface Vessel for Experimental Field Robotics Research with ROS 2](https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.05627) on arXiv.
